Conditional probability
83
monty <- function() {
doors <- 1:3
# randomly pick where the car is
cardoor <- sample(doors,1)
# prompt player
print("Monty Hall says 'Pick a door, any door!'")
# receive the player's choice of door (should be 1,2, or 3)
chosen <- scan(what = integer(), nlines = 1, quiet = TRUE)
# pick Monty's door (can't be the player's door or the car door)
if (chosen != cardoor) montydoor <- doors[-c(chosen, cardoor)]
else montydoor <- sample(doors[-chosen],1)
# find out whether the player wants to switch doors
print(paste("Monty opens door ", montydoor, "!", sep=""))
print("Would you like to switch (y/n)?")
reply <- scan(what = character(), nlines = 1, quiet = TRUE)
# interpret what player wrote as "yes" if it starts with "y"
if (substr(reply,1,1) == "y"){
chosen <- doors[-c(chosen,montydoor)]
}
# announce the result of the game!
if (chosen == cardoor) print("You won!")
else print("You lost!")
}
The print command prints its argument to the screen. We combine this with the
paste command since if we used print("Monty opens door montydoor") then R
would literally print "Monty opens door montydoor". The scan command interac-
tively requests input from the user; we use what = integer() when we want the
user to enter an integer and what = character() when we want the user to enter
text. Using substr(reply,1,1) extracts the first character of reply, in case the
user replies with "yes" or "yep" or "yeah!" rather than with "y".
2.11
Exercises
Exercises marked with s⃝have detailed solutions at http://stat110.net.
84
Introduction to Probability
Conditioning on evidence
1.
s⃝A spam filter is designed by looking at commonly occurring phrases in spam. Suppose
that 80% of email is spam. In 10% of the spam emails, the phrase "free money" is used,
whereas this phrase is only used in 1% of non-spam emails. A new email has just arrived,
which does mention "free money". What is the probability that it is spam?
2.
s⃝A woman is pregnant with twin boys. Twins may be either identical or fraternal.
Suppose that 1/3 of twins born are identical, that identical twins have a 50% chance
of being both boys and a 50% chance of being both girls, and that for fraternal twins
each twin independently has a 50% chance of being a boy and a 50% chance of being a
girl. Given the above information, what is the probability that the woman's twins are
identical?
3.
According to the CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention), men who smoke are
23 times more likely to develop lung cancer than men who don't smoke. Also according
to the CDC, 21.6% of men in the U.S. smoke. What is the probability that a man in
the U.S. is a smoker, given that he develops lung cancer?
4.
Fred is answering a multiple-choice problem on an exam, and has to choose one of n
options (exactly one of which is correct). Let K be the event that he knows the answer,
and R be the event that he gets the problem right (either through knowledge or through
luck). Suppose that if he knows the right answer he will definitely get the problem right,
but if he does not know then he will guess completely randomly. Let P(K) = p.
(a) Find P(K|R) (in terms of p and n).
(b) Show that P(K|R) ≥p, and explain why this makes sense intuitively. When (if ever)
does P(K|R) equal p?
5.
Three cards are dealt from a standard, well-shuffled deck. The first two cards are flipped
over, revealing the Ace of Spades as the first card and the 8 of Clubs as the second card.
Given this information, find the probability that the third card is an ace in two ways:
using the definition of conditional probability, and by symmetry.
6.
A hat contains 100 coins, where 99 are fair but one is double-headed (always landing
Heads). A coin is chosen uniformly at random. The chosen coin is flipped 7 times, and it
lands Heads all 7 times. Given this information, what is the probability that the chosen
coin is double-headed? (Of course, another approach here would be to look at both sides
of the coin-but this is a metaphorical coin.)
7.
A hat contains 100 coins, where at least 99 are fair, but there may be one that is double-
headed (always landing Heads); if there is no such coin, then all 100 are fair. Let D be
the event that there is such a coin, and suppose that P(D) = 1/2. A coin is chosen
uniformly at random. The chosen coin is flipped 7 times, and it lands Heads all 7 times.
(a) Given this information, what is the probability that one of the coins is double-
headed?
(b) Given this information, what is the probability that the chosen coin is double-
headed?
8.
The screens used for a certain type of cell phone are manufactured by 3 companies,
A, B, and C. The proportions of screens supplied by A, B, and C are 0.5, 0.3, and
0.2, respectively, and their screens are defective with probabilities 0.01, 0.02, and 0.03,
respectively. Given that the screen on such a phone is defective, what is the probability
that Company A manufactured it?
9.
(a) Show that if events A1 and A2 have the same prior probability P(A1) = P(A2),
A1 implies B, and A2 implies B, then A1 and A2 have the same posterior probability
P(A1|B) = P(A2|B) if it is observed that B occurred.
(b) Explain why (a) makes sense intuitively, and give a concrete example.
Conditional probability
85
10.
Fred is working on a major project. In planning the project, two milestones are set up,
with dates by which they should be accomplished. This serves as a way to track Fred's
progress. Let A1 be the event that Fred completes the first milestone on time, A2 be
the event that he completes the second milestone on time, and A3 be the event that he
completes the project on time.
Suppose that P(Aj+1|Aj) = 0.8 but P(Aj+1|Ac
j) = 0.3 for j = 1, 2, since if Fred falls
behind on his schedule it will be hard for him to get caught up. Also, assume that the
second milestone supersedes the first, in the sense that once we know whether he is
on time in completing the second milestone, it no longer matters what happened with
the first milestone. We can express this by saying that A1 and A3 are conditionally
independent given A2 and they're also conditionally independent given Ac
2.
(a) Find the probability that Fred will finish the project on time, given that he completes
the first milestone on time. Also find the probability that Fred will finish the project on
time, given that he is late for the first milestone.
(b) Suppose that P(A1) = 0.75. Find the probability that Fred will finish the project
on time.
11.
An exit poll in an election is a survey taken of voters just after they have voted. One
major use of exit polls has been so that news organizations can try to figure out as
soon as possible who won the election, before the votes are officially counted. This has
been notoriously inaccurate in various elections, sometimes because of selection bias:
the sample of people who are invited to and agree to participate in the survey may not
be similar enough to the overall population of voters.
Consider an election with two candidates, Candidate A and Candidate B. Every voter
is invited to participate in an exit poll, where they are asked whom they voted for; some
accept and some refuse. For a randomly selected voter, let A be the event that they voted
for A, and W be the event that they are willing to participate in the exit poll. Suppose
that P(W|A) = 0.7 but P(W|Ac) = 0.3. In the exit poll, 60% of the respondents say
they voted for A (assume that they are all honest), suggesting a comfortable victory for
A. Find P(A), the true proportion of people who voted for A.
12.
Alice is trying to communicate with Bob, by sending a message (encoded in binary)
across a channel.
(a) Suppose for this part that she sends only one bit (a 0 or 1), with equal probabilities.
If she sends a 0, there is a 5% chance of an error occurring, resulting in Bob receiving a
1; if she sends a 1, there is a 10% chance of an error occurring, resulting in Bob receiving
a 0. Given that Bob receives a 1, what is the probability that Alice actually sent a 1?
(b) To reduce the chance of miscommunication, Alice and Bob decide to use a repetition
code. Again Alice wants to convey a 0 or a 1, but this time she repeats it two more times,
so that she sends 000 to convey 0 and 111 to convey 1. Bob will decode the message by
going with what the majority of the bits were. Assume that the error probabilities are
as in (a), with error events for different bits independent of each other. Given that Bob
receives 110, what is the probability that Alice intended to convey a 1?
13.
Company A has just developed a diagnostic test for a certain disease. The disease
afflicts 1% of the population. As defined in Example 2.3.9, the sensitivity of the test is
the probability of someone testing positive, given that they have the disease, and the
specificity of the test is the probability that of someone testing negative, given that they
don't have the disease. Assume that, as in Example 2.3.9, the sensitivity and specificity
are both 0.95.
Company B, which is a rival of Company A, offers a competing test for the disease.
Company B claims that their test is faster and less expensive to perform than Company
A's test, is less painful (Company A's test requires an incision), and yet has a higher
86
Introduction to Probability
overall success rate, where overall success rate is defined as the probability that a random
person gets diagnosed correctly.
(a) It turns out that Company B's test can be described and performed very simply: no
matter who the patient is, diagnose that they do not have the disease. Check whether
Company B's claim about overall success rates is true.
(b) Explain why Company A's test may still be useful.
(c) Company A wants to develop a new test such that the overall success rate is higher
than that of Company B's test. If the sensitivity and specificity are equal, how high
does the sensitivity have to be to achieve their goal? If (amazingly) they can get the
sensitivity equal to 1, how high does the specificity have to be to achieve their goal? If
(amazingly) they can get the specificity equal to 1, how high does the sensitivity have
to be to achieve their goal?
14.
Consider the following scenario, from Tversky and Kahneman [27]:
Let A be the event that before the end of next year, Peter will have installed
a burglar alarm system in his home. Let B denote the event that Peter's
home will be burglarized before the end of next year.
(a) Intuitively, which do you think is bigger, P(A|B) or P(A|Bc)? Explain your intuition.
(b) Intuitively, which do you think is bigger, P(B|A) or P(B|Ac)? Explain your intuition.
(c) Show that for any events A and B (with probabilities not equal to 0 or 1), the
inequality P(A|B) > P(A|Bc) is equivalent to P(B|A) > P(B|Ac).
(d) Tversky and Kahneman report that 131 out of 162 people whom they posed (a)
and (b) to said that P(A|B) > P(A|Bc) and P(B|A) < P(B|Ac). What is a plausible
explanation for why this was such a popular opinion despite (c) showing that it is
impossible for these inequalities both to hold?
15.
Let A and B be events with 0 < P(A ∩B) < P(A) < P(B) < P(A ∪B) < 1. You are
hoping that both A and B occurred. Which of the following pieces of information would
you be happiest to observe: that A occurred, that B occurred, or that A ∪B occurred?
16.
Show that P(A|B) ≤P(A) implies P(A|Bc) ≥P(A), and give an intuitive explanation
of why this makes sense.
17.
In deterministic logic, the statement "A implies B" is equivalent to its contrapositive,
"not B implies not A". In this problem we will consider analogous statements in prob-
ability, the logic of uncertainty. Let A and B be events with probabilities not equal to
0 or 1.
(a) Show that if P(B|A) = 1, then P(Ac|Bc) = 1.
Hint: Apply Bayes' rule and LOTP.
(b) Show however that the result in (a) does not hold in general if = is replaced by ≈.
In particular, find an example where P(B|A) is very close to 1 but P(Ac|Bc) is very
close to 0.
Hint: What happens if A and B are independent?
18.
Show that if P(A) = 1, then P(A|B) = 1 for any B with P(B) > 0. Intuitively, this says
that if someone dogmatically believes something with absolute certainty, then no amount
of evidence will change their mind. The principle of avoiding assigning probabilities of
0 or 1 to any event (except for mathematical certainties) was named Cromwell's rule
by the statistician Dennis Lindley, due to Cromwell saying to the Church of Scotland,
"Think it possible you may be mistaken."
Hint: Write P(B) = P(B ∩A) + P(B ∩Ac), and then show that P(B ∩Ac) = 0.
Conditional probability
87
19.
Explain the following Sherlock Holmes saying in terms of conditional probability, care-
fully distinguishing between prior and posterior probabilities: "It is an old maxim of
mine that when you have excluded the impossible, whatever remains, however improb-
able, must be the truth."
20.
The Jack of Spades (with cider), Jack of Hearts (with tarts), Queen of Spades (with a
wink), and Queen of Hearts (without tarts) are taken from a deck of cards. These four
cards are shuffled, and then two are dealt. Note: Literary references to cider, tarts, and
winks do not need to be considered when solving this problem.
(a) Find the probability that both of these two cards are queens, given that the first
card dealt is a queen.
(b) Find the probability that both are queens, given that at least one is a queen.
(c) Find the probability that both are queens, given that one is the Queen of Hearts.
21.
A fair coin is flipped 3 times. The toss results are recorded on separate slips of paper
(writing "H" if Heads and "T" if Tails), and the 3 slips of paper are thrown into a hat.
(a) Find the probability that all 3 tosses landed Heads, given that at least 2 were Heads.
(b) Two of the slips of paper are randomly drawn from the hat, and both show the
letter H. Given this information, what is the probability that all 3 tosses landed Heads?
22.
s⃝A bag contains one marble which is either green or blue, with equal probabilities. A
green marble is put in the bag (so there are 2 marbles now), and then a random marble
is taken out. The marble taken out is green. What is the probability that the remaining
marble is also green?
23.
s⃝Let G be the event that a certain individual is guilty of a certain robbery. In gathering
evidence, it is learned that an event E1 occurred, and a little later it is also learned that
another event E2 also occurred. Is it possible that individually, these pieces of evidence
increase the chance of guilt (so P(G|E1) > P(G) and P(G|E2) > P(G)), but together
they decrease the chance of guilt (so P(G|E1, E2) < P(G))?
24.
Is it possible to have events A1, A2, B, C with P(A1|B) > P(A1|C) and P(A2|B) >
P(A2|C), yet P(A1 ∪A2|B) < P(A1 ∪A2|C)? If so, find an example (with a "story"
interpreting the events, as well as giving specific numbers); otherwise, show that it is
impossible for this phenomenon to happen.
25.
s⃝A crime is committed by one of two suspects, A and B. Initially, there is equal
evidence against both of them. In further investigation at the crime scene, it is found
that the guilty party had a blood type found in 10% of the population. Suspect A does
match this blood type, whereas the blood type of Suspect B is unknown.
(a) Given this new information, what is the probability that A is the guilty party?
(b) Given this new information, what is the probability that B's blood type matches
that found at the crime scene?
26.
s⃝To battle against spam, Bob installs two anti-spam programs. An email arrives,
which is either legitimate (event L) or spam (event Lc), and which program j marks as
legitimate (event Mj) or marks as spam (event M c
j ) for j ∈{1, 2}. Assume that 10%
of Bob's email is legitimate and that the two programs are each "90% accurate" in the
sense that P(Mj|L) = P(M c
j |Lc) = 9/10. Also assume that given whether an email is
spam, the two programs' outputs are conditionally independent.
(a) Find the probability that the email is legitimate, given that the 1st program marks
it as legitimate (simplify).
(b) Find the probability that the email is legitimate, given that both programs mark it
as legitimate (simplify).
88
Introduction to Probability
(c) Bob runs the 1st program and M1 occurs. He updates his probabilities and then
runs the 2nd program. Let ˜P(A) = P(A|M1) be the updated probability function after
running the 1st program. Explain briefly in words whether or not ˜P(L|M2) = P(L|M1 ∩
M2): is conditioning on M1 ∩M2 in one step equivalent to first conditioning on M1, then
updating probabilities, and then conditioning on M2?
27.
Suppose that there are 5 blood types in the population, named type 1 through type 5,
with probabilities p1, p2, . . . , p5. A crime was committed by two individuals. A suspect,
who has blood type 1, has prior probability p of being guilty. At the crime scene, blood
evidence is collected, which shows that one of the criminals has type 1 and the other
has type 2.
Find the posterior probability that the suspect is guilty, given the evidence. Does the
evidence make it more likely or less likely that the suspect is guilty, or does this depend
on the values of the parameters p, p1, . . . , p5? If it depends on these values, give a simple
criterion for when the evidence makes it more likely that the suspect is guilty.
28.
Fred has just tested positive for a certain disease.
(a) Given this information, find the posterior odds that he has the disease, in terms of
the prior odds, the sensitivity of the test, and the specificity of the test.
(b) Not surprisingly, Fred is much more interested in P(have disease|test positive),
known as the positive predictive value, than in the sensitivity P(test positive|have disease).
A handy rule of thumb in biostatistics and epidemiology is as follows:
For a rare disease and a reasonably good test, specificity matters much more than sen-
sitivity in determining the positive predictive value.
Explain intuitively why this rule of thumb works. For this part you can make up some
specific numbers and interpret probabilities in a frequentist way as proportions in a
large population, e.g., assume the disease afflicts 1% of a population of 10000 people
and then consider various possibilities for the sensitivity and specificity.
29.
A family has two children. Let C be a characteristic that a child can have, and assume
that each child has characteristic C with probability p, independently of each other and
of gender. For example, C could be the characteristic "born in winter" as in Exam-
ple 2.2.7. Under the assumptions of Example 2.2.5, show that the probability that both
children are girls given that at least one is a girl with characteristic C is 2−p
4−p. Note that
this is 1/3 if p = 1 (agreeing with the first part of Example 2.2.5) and approaches 1/2
from below as p →0 (agreeing with Example 2.2.7).
Independence and conditional independence
30.
s⃝A family has 3 children, creatively named A, B, and C.
(a) Discuss intuitively (but clearly) whether the event "A is older than B" is independent
of the event "A is older than C".
(b) Find the probability that A is older than B, given that A is older than C.
31.
s⃝Is it possible that an event is independent of itself? If so, when is this the case?
32.
s⃝Consider four nonstandard dice (the Efron dice), whose sides are labeled as follows
(the 6 sides on each die are equally likely).
A: 4, 4, 4, 4, 0, 0
B: 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3
C: 6, 6, 2, 2, 2, 2
Conditional probability
89
D: 5, 5, 5, 1, 1, 1
These four dice are each rolled once. Let A be the result for die A, B be the result for
die B, etc.
(a) Find P(A > B), P(B > C), P(C > D), and P(D > A).
(b) Is the event A > B independent of the event B > C? Is the event B > C independent
of the event C > D? Explain.
33.
Alice, Bob, and 100 other people live in a small town. Let C be the set consisting of the
100 other people, let A be the set of people in C who are friends with Alice, and let B
be the set of people in C who are friends with Bob. Suppose that for each person in C,
Alice is friends with that person with probability 1/2, and likewise for Bob, with all of
these friendship statuses independent.
(a) Let D ⊆C. Find P(A = D).
(b) Find P(A ⊆B).
(c) Find P(A ∪B = C).
34.
Suppose that there are two types of drivers: good drivers and bad drivers. Let G be
the event that a certain man is a good driver, A be the event that he gets into a car
accident next year, and B be the event that he gets into a car accident the following
year. Let P(G) = g and P(A|G) = P(B|G) = p1, P(A|Gc) = P(B|Gc) = p2, with
p1 < p2. Suppose that given the information of whether or not the man is a good driver,
A and B are independent (for simplicity and to avoid being morbid, assume that the
accidents being considered are minor and wouldn't make the man unable to drive).
(a) Explain intuitively whether or not A and B are independent.
(b) Find P(G|Ac).
(c) Find P(B|Ac).
35.
s⃝You are going to play 2 games of chess with an opponent whom you have never
played against before (for the sake of this problem). Your opponent is equally likely to
be a beginner, intermediate, or a master. Depending on which, your chances of winning
an individual game are 90%, 50%, or 30%, respectively.
(a) What is your probability of winning the first game?
(b) Congratulations: you won the first game! Given this information, what is the prob-
ability that you will also win the second game (assume that, given the skill level of your
opponent, the outcomes of the games are independent)?
(c) Explain the distinction between assuming that the outcomes of the games are in-
dependent and assuming that they are conditionally independent given the opponent's
skill level. Which of these assumptions seems more reasonable, and why?
36.
(a) Suppose that in the population of college applicants, being good at baseball is
independent of having a good math score on a certain standardized test (with respect
to some measure of "good"). A certain college has a simple admissions procedure: admit
an applicant if and only if the applicant is good at baseball or has a good math score
on the test.
Give an intuitive explanation of why it makes sense that among students that the college
admits, having a good math score is negatively associated with being good at baseball,
i.e., conditioning on having a good math score decreases the chance of being good at
baseball.
90
Introduction to Probability
(b) Show that if A and B are independent and C = A∪B, then A and B are conditionally
dependent given C (as long as P(A ∩B) > 0 and P(A ∪B) < 1), with
P(A|B, C) < P(A|C).
This phenomenon is known as Berkson's paradox, especially in the context of admissions
to a school, hospital, etc.
37.
Two different diseases cause a certain weird symptom; anyone who has either or both
of these diseases will experience the symptom. Let D1 be the event of having the first
disease, D2 be the event of having the second disease, and W be the event of having the
weird symptom. Suppose that D1 and D2 are independent with P(Dj) = pj, and that a
person with neither of these diseases will have the weird symptom with probability w0.
Let qj = 1 −pj, and assume that 0 < pj < 1.
(a) Find P(W).
(b) Find P(D1|W), P(D2|W), and P(D1, D2|W).
(c) Determine algebraically whether or not D1 and D2 are conditionally independent
given W.
(d) Suppose for this part only that w0 = 0. Give a clear, convincing intuitive explanation
in words of whether D1 and D2 are conditionally independent given W.
38.
We want to design a spam filter for email. As described in Exercise 1, a major strategy
is to find phrases that are much more likely to appear in a spam email than in a non-
spam email. In that exercise, we only consider one such phrase: "free money". More
realistically, suppose that we have created a list of 100 words or phrases that are much
more likely to be used in spam than in non-spam.
Let Wj be the event that an email contains the jth word or phrase on the list. Let
p = P(spam), pj = P(Wj|spam), rj = P(Wj|not spam),
where "spam" is shorthand for the event that the email is spam.
Assume that W1, . . . , W100 are conditionally independent given that the email is spam,
and conditionally independent given that it is not spam. A method for classifying emails
(or other objects) based on this kind of assumption is called a naive Bayes classifier.
(Here "naive" refers to the fact that the conditional independence is a strong assumption,
not to Bayes being naive. The assumption may or may not be realistic, but naive Bayes
classifiers sometimes work well in practice even if the assumption is not realistic.)
Under this assumption we know, for example, that
P(W1, W2, W c
3 , W c
4 , . . . , W c
100|spam) = p1p2(1 −p3)(1 −p4) . . . (1 −p100).
Without the naive Bayes assumption, there would be vastly more statistical and com-
putational difficulties since we would need to consider 2100 ≈1.3 × 1030 events of the
form A1 ∩A2 · · · ∩A100 with each Aj equal to either Wj or W c
j . A new email has just
arrived, and it includes the 23rd, 64th, and 65th words or phrases on the list (but not
the other 97). So we want to compute
P(spam|W c
1 , . . . , W c
22, W23, W c
24, . . . , W c
63, W64, W65, W c
66, . . . , W c
100).
Note that we need to condition on all the evidence, not just the fact that W23∩W64∩W65
occurred. Find the conditional probability that the new email is spam (in terms of p
and the pj and rj).
Conditional probability
91
Monty Hall
39.
s⃝(a) Consider the following 7-door version of the Monty Hall problem. There are 7
doors, behind one of which there is a car (which you want), and behind the rest of which
there are goats (which you don't want). Initially, all possibilities are equally likely for
where the car is. You choose a door. Monty Hall then opens 3 goat doors, and offers
you the option of switching to any of the remaining 3 doors.
Assume that Monty Hall knows which door has the car, will always open 3 goat doors
and offer the option of switching, and that Monty chooses with equal probabilities from
all his choices of which goat doors to open. Should you switch? What is your probability
of success if you switch to one of the remaining 3 doors?
(b) Generalize the above to a Monty Hall problem where there are n ≥3 doors, of which
Monty opens m goat doors, with 1 ≤m ≤n −2.
40.
s⃝Consider the Monty Hall problem, except that Monty enjoys opening door 2 more
than he enjoys opening door 3, and if he has a choice between opening these two doors,
he opens door 2 with probability p, where 1
2 ≤p ≤1.
To recap: there are three doors, behind one of which there is a car (which you want),
and behind the other two of which there are goats (which you don't want). Initially,
all possibilities are equally likely for where the car is. You choose a door, which for
concreteness we assume is door 1. Monty Hall then opens a door to reveal a goat, and
offers you the option of switching. Assume that Monty Hall knows which door has the
car, will always open a goat door and offer the option of switching, and as above assume
that if Monty Hall has a choice between opening door 2 and door 3, he chooses door 2
with probability p (with 1
2 ≤p ≤1).
(a) Find the unconditional probability that the strategy of always switching succeeds
(unconditional in the sense that we do not condition on which of doors 2 or 3 Monty
opens).
(b) Find the probability that the strategy of always switching succeeds, given that Monty
opens door 2.
(c) Find the probability that the strategy of always switching succeeds, given that Monty
opens door 3.
41.
The ratings of Monty Hall's show have dropped slightly, and a panicking executive
producer complains to Monty that the part of the show where he opens a door lacks
suspense: Monty always opens a door with a goat. Monty replies that the reason is so
that the game is never spoiled by him revealing the car, but he agrees to update the
game as follows.
Before each show, Monty secretly flips a coin with probability p of Heads. If the coin
lands Heads, Monty resolves to open a door with a goat (with equal probabilities if there
is a choice). Otherwise, Monty resolves to open a random door, with equal probabilities.
Of course, Monty will not open the door that the contestant initially chooses. The
contestant knows p but does not know the outcome of the coin flip. When the show
starts, the contestant chooses a door. Monty (who knows where the car is) then opens a
door. If the car is revealed, the game is over; if a goat is revealed, the contestant is offered
the option of switching. Now suppose it turns out that the contestant chooses door 1
and then Monty opens door 2, revealing a goat. What is the contestant's probability of
success if they switch to door 3?
42.
Consider the following variation of the Monty Hall problem, where in some situations
Monty may not open a door and give the contestant the choice of whether to switch
doors. Specifically, there are 3 doors, with 2 containing goats and 1 containing a car. The
car is equally likely to be anywhere, and Monty knows where the car is. Let 0 ≤p ≤1.
92
Introduction to Probability
The contestant chooses a door. If this initial choice has the car, Monty will open another
door, revealing a goat (choosing with equal probabilities among his two choices of door),
and then offer the contestant the choice of whether to switch to the other unopened door.
If the contestant's initial choice has a goat, then with probability p Monty will open
another door, revealing a goat, and then offer the contestant the choice of whether to
switch to the other unopened door; but with probability 1 −p, Monty will not open a
door, and the contestant must stick with their initial choice.
The contestant decides in advance to use the following strategy: initially choose door 1.
Then, if Monty opens a door and offers the choice of whether to switch, do switch.
(a) Find the unconditional probability that the contestant will get the car. Also, check
what your answer reduces to in the extreme cases p = 0 and p = 1, and briefly explain
why your answer makes sense in these two cases.
(b) Monty now opens door 2, revealing a goat. So the contestant switches to door 3.
Given this information, find the conditional probability that the contestant will get the
car.
43.
You are the contestant on the Monty Hall show. Monty is trying out a new version of
his game, with rules as follows. You get to choose one of three doors. One door has a car
behind it, another has a computer, and the other door has a goat (with all permutations
equally likely). Monty, who knows which prize is behind each door, will open a door (but
not the one you chose) and then let you choose whether to switch from your current
choice to the other unopened door.
Assume that you prefer the car to the computer, the computer to the goat, and (by
transitivity) the car to the goat.
(a) Suppose for this part only that Monty always opens the door that reveals your less
preferred prize out of the two alternatives, e.g., if he is faced with the choice between
revealing the goat or the computer, he will reveal the goat. Monty opens a door, revealing
a goat (this is again for this part only). Given this information, should you switch? If
you do switch, what is your probability of success in getting the car?
(b) Now suppose that Monty reveals your less preferred prize with probability p, and
your more preferred prize with probability q = 1 −p. Monty opens a door, revealing a
computer. Given this information, should you switch (your answer can depend on p)?
If you do switch, what is your probability of success in getting the car (in terms of p)?
44.
Monty Hall has introduced a new twist in his game, by generalizing the assumption that
the initial probabilities for where the car is are ( 1
3, 1
3, 1
3). Specifically, there are three
doors, behind one of which there is a car (which the contestant wants), and behind the
other two of which there are goats (which the contestant doesn't want). Initially, door
i has probability pi of having the car, where p1, p2, p3 are known constants such that
0 < p1 ≤p2 ≤p3 < 1 and p1 + p2 + p3 = 1. The contestant chooses a door. Then Monty
opens a door (other than the one the contestant chose) and offers the contestant the
option of switching to the other unopened door.
(a) Assume for this part that Monty knows in advance which door has the car. He always
opens a door to reveal a goat, and if he has a choice of which door to open he chooses
with equal probabilities. Suppose for this part that the contestant initially chooses door
3, and then Monty opens door 2, revealing a goat. Given the above information, find
the conditional probability that door 3 has the car. Should the contestant switch doors?
(If whether to switch depends on the pi's, give a fully simplified criterion in terms of
the pi's.)
(b) Now assume instead that Monty does not know in advance where the car is. He
randomly chooses which door to open (other than the one the contestant chose), with
equal probabilities. (The game is spoiled if he reveals the car.) Suppose again that the
Conditional probability
93
contestant initially chooses door 3, and then Monty opens door 2, revealing a goat.
Given the above information, find the conditional probability that door 3 has the car.
Should the contestant switch doors? (If whether to switch depends on the pi's, give a
fully simplified criterion in terms of the pi's.)
(c) Repeat (a), except with the contestant initially choosing door 1 rather than door 3.
(d) Repeat (b), except with the contestant initially choosing door 1 rather than door 3.
45.
Monty Hall is trying out a new version of his game. In this version, instead of there always
being 1 car and 2 goats, the prizes behind the doors are generated independently, with
each door having probability p of having a car and q = 1 −p of having a goat. In detail:
There are three doors, behind each of which there is one prize: either a car or a goat.
For each door, there is probability p that there is a car behind it and q = 1 −p that
there is a goat, independent of the other doors.
The contestant chooses a door. Monty, who knows the contents of each door, then opens
one of the two remaining doors. In choosing which door to open, Monty will always reveal
a goat if possible. If both of the remaining doors have the same kind of prize, Monty
chooses randomly (with equal probabilities). After opening a door, Monty offers the
contestant the option of switching to the other unopened door.
The contestant decides in advance to use the following strategy: first choose door 1.
Then, after Monty opens a door, switch to the other unopened door.
(a) Find the unconditional probability that the contestant will get a car.
(b) Monty now opens door 2, revealing a goat. Given this information, find the condi-
tional probability that the contestant will get a car.
46.
Monty Hall is trying out a new version of his game, with rules as follows. The contes-
tant gets to choose one of four doors. One door has a car behind it, another has an
apple, another has a book, and another has a goat. All 24 permutations for which door
has which prize are equally likely. In order from least preferred to most preferred, the
contestant's preferences are: goat, apple, book, car.
Monty, who knows which prize is behind each door, will open a door (other than the
contestant's initial choice) and then let the contestant choose whether to switch to
another unopened door. Monty will reveal the least preferred prize (among the 3 doors
other than the contestant's initial choice) with probability p, the intermediately preferred
prize with probability 1 −p, and the most preferred prize never.
The contestant decides in advance to use the following strategy: Initially choose door
1. After Monty opens a door, switch to one of the other two unopened doors, randomly
choosing between them (with probability 1/2 each).
(a) Find the unconditional probability that the contestant will get the car.
Hint: Condition on where the car is.
(b) Find the unconditional probability that Monty will reveal the apple.
Hint: Condition on what is behind door 1.
(c) Monty now opens a door, revealing the apple. Given this information, find the
conditional probability that the contestant will get the car.
47.
You are the contestant on Monty Hall's game show. Hoping to double the excitement of
the game, Monty will offer you two opportunities to switch to another door. Specifically,
the new rules are as follows. There are four doors. Behind one door there is a car (which
you want); behind the other three doors there are goats (which you don't want). Initially,
all possibilities are equally likely for where the car is. Monty knows where the car is,
and when he has a choice of which door to open, he chooses with equal probabilities.
You choose a door, which for concreteness we assume is door 1. Monty opens a door
94
Introduction to Probability
(other than door 1), revealing a goat, and then offers you the option to switch to
another door. Monty then opens another door (other than your currently selected door),
revealing another goat. So now there are two open doors (with goats) and two unopened
doors. Again Monty offers you the option to switch.
You decide in advance to use one of the following four strategies: stay-stay, stay-switch,
switch-stay, switch-switch, where, for example, "stay-switch" means that the first time
Monty offers you the choice of switching, you stay with your current selection, but then
the second time Monty offers you the choice, you do switch doors. In each part below
the goal is to find or compare unconditional probabilities, i.e., from a vantage point of
before the game has started.
(a) Find the probability of winning the car if you follow the stay-stay strategy.
(b) Find the probability of winning the car if you follow the stay-switch strategy.
(c) Find the probability of winning the car if you follow the switch-stay strategy.
(d) Find the probability of winning the car if you follow the switch-switch strategy.
(e) Which of these four strategies is the best?
First-step analysis and gambler's ruin
48.
s⃝A fair die is rolled repeatedly, and a running total is kept (which is, at each time,
the total of all the rolls up until that time). Let pn be the probability that the running
total is ever exactly n (assume the die will always be rolled enough times so that the
running total will eventually exceed n, but it may or may not ever equal n).
(a) Write down a recursive equation for pn (relating pn to earlier terms pk in a simple
way). Your equation should be true for all positive integers n, so give a definition of p0
and pk for k < 0 so that the recursive equation is true for small values of n.
(b) Find p7.
(c) Give an intuitive explanation for the fact that pn →1/3.5 = 2/7 as n →∞.
49.
A sequence of n ≥1 independent trials is performed, where each trial ends in "success"
or "failure" (but not both). Let pi be the probability of success in the ith trial, qi = 1−pi,
and bi = qi −1/2, for i = 1, 2, . . . , n. Let An be the event that the number of successful
trials is even.
(a) Show that for n = 2, P(A2) = 1/2 + 2b1b2.
(b) Show by induction that
P(An) = 1/2 + 2n−1b1b2 . . . bn.
(This result is very useful in cryptography. Also, note that it implies that if n coins are
flipped, then the probability of an even number of Heads is 1/2 if and only if at least
one of the coins is fair.) Hint: Group some trials into a supertrial.
(c) Check directly that the result of (b) is true in the following simple cases: pi = 1/2
for some i; pi = 0 for all i; pi = 1 for all i.
50.
s⃝Calvin and Hobbes play a match consisting of a series of games, where Calvin has
probability p of winning each game (independently). They play with a "win by two"
rule: the first player to win two games more than his opponent wins the match. Find
the probability that Calvin wins the match (in terms of p), in two different ways:
(a) by conditioning, using the law of total probability.
(b) by interpreting the problem as a gambler's ruin problem.
Conditional probability
95
51.
s⃝A gambler repeatedly plays a game where in each round, he wins a dollar with
probability 1/3 and loses a dollar with probability 2/3. His strategy is "quit when he is
ahead by $2". Suppose that he starts with a million dollars. Show that the probability
that he'll ever be ahead by $2 is less than 1/4.
52.
As in the gambler's ruin problem, two gamblers, A and B, make a series of bets, until
one of the gamblers goes bankrupt. Let A start out with i dollars and B start out with
N −i dollars, and let p be the probability of A winning a bet, with 0 < p < 1
2. Each
bet is for 1
k dollars, with k a positive integer, e.g., k = 1 is the original gambler's ruin
problem and k = 20 means they're betting nickels. Find the probability that A wins the
game, and determine what happens to this as k →∞.
53.
There are 100 equally spaced points around a circle. At 99 of the points, there are
sheep, and at 1 point, there is a wolf. At each time step, the wolf randomly moves either
clockwise or counterclockwise by 1 point. If there is a sheep at that point, he eats it.
The sheep don't move. What is the probability that the sheep who is initially opposite
the wolf is the last one remaining?
54.
An immortal drunk man wanders around randomly on the integers. He starts at the
origin, and at each step he moves 1 unit to the right or 1 unit to the left, with probabilities
p and q = 1−p respectively, independently of all his previous steps. Let Sn be his position
after n steps.
(a) Let pk be the probability that the drunk ever reaches the value k, for all k ≥0.
Write down a difference equation for pk (you do not need to solve it for this part).
(b) Find pk, fully simplified; be sure to consider all 3 cases: p < 1/2, p = 1/2, and
p > 1/2. Feel free to assume that if A1, A2, . . . are events with Aj ⊆Aj+1 for all j,
then P(An) →P(∪∞
j=1Aj) as n →∞(because it is true; this is known as continuity of
probability).
Simpson's paradox
55.
s⃝(a) Is it possible to have events A, B, C such that P(A|C) < P(B|C) and P(A|Cc) <
P(B|Cc), yet P(A) > P(B)? That is, A is less likely than B given that C is true,
and also less likely than B given that C is false, yet A is more likely than B if we're
given no information about C. Show this is impossible (with a short proof) or find a
counterexample (with a story interpreting A, B, C).
(b) If the scenario in (a) is possible, is it a special case of Simpson's paradox, equivalent to
Simpson's paradox, or neither? If it is impossible, explain intuitively why it is impossible
even though Simpson's paradox is possible.
56.
s⃝Consider the following conversation from an episode of The Simpsons:
Lisa: Dad, I think he's an ivory dealer! His boots are ivory, his hat is
ivory, and I'm pretty sure that check is ivory.
Homer: Lisa, a guy who has lots of ivory is less likely to hurt Stampy
than a guy whose ivory supplies are low.
Here Homer and Lisa are debating the question of whether or not the man (named
Blackheart) is likely to hurt Stampy the Elephant if they sell Stampy to him. They
clearly disagree about how to use their observations about Blackheart to learn about
the probability (conditional on the evidence) that Blackheart will hurt Stampy.
(a) Define clear notation for the various events of interest here.
(b) Express Lisa's and Homer's arguments (Lisa's is partly implicit) as conditional
probability statements in terms of your notation from (a).
96
Introduction to Probability
(c) Assume it is true that someone who has a lot of a commodity will have less desire
to acquire more of the commodity. Explain what is wrong with Homer's reasoning that
the evidence about Blackheart makes it less likely that he will harm Stampy.
57.
(a) There are two crimson jars (labeled C1 and C2) and two mauve jars (labeled M1 and
M2). Each jar contains a mixture of green gummi bears and red gummi bears. Show by
example that it is possible that C1 has a much higher percentage of green gummi bears
than M1, and C2 has a much higher percentage of green gummi bears than M2, yet if
the contents of C1 and C2 are merged into a new jar and likewise for M1 and M2, then
the combination of C1 and C2 has a lower percentage of green gummi bears than the
combination of M1 and M2.
(b) Explain how (a) relates to Simpson's paradox, both intuitively and by explicitly
defining events A, B, C as in the statement of Simpson's paradox.
58.
As explained in this chapter, Simpson's paradox says that it is possible to have events
A, B, C such that P(A|B, C) < P(A|Bc, C) and P(A|B, Cc) < P(A|Bc, Cc), yet
P(A|B) > P(A|Bc).
(a) Can Simpson's paradox occur if A and B are independent? If so, give a concrete
example (with both numbers and an interpretation); if not, prove that it is impossible.
(b) Can Simpson's paradox occur if A and C are independent? If so, give a concrete
example (with both numbers and an interpretation); if not, prove that it is impossible.
(c) Can Simpson's paradox occur if B and C are independent? If so, give a concrete
example (with both numbers and an interpretation); if not, prove that it is impossible.
59.
s⃝The book Red State, Blue State, Rich State, Poor State by Andrew Gelman [12]
discusses the following election phenomenon: within any U.S. state, a wealthy voter is
more likely to vote for a Republican than a poor voter, yet the wealthier states tend to
favor Democratic candidates!
(a) Assume for simplicity that there are only 2 states (called Red and Blue), each
of which has 100 people, and that each person is either rich or poor, and either a
Democrat or a Republican. Make up numbers consistent with the above, showing how
this phenomenon is possible, by giving a 2 × 2 table for each state (listing how many
people in each state are rich Democrats, etc.). So within each state, a rich voter is more
likely to vote for a Republican than a poor voter, but the percentage of Democrats is
higher in the state with the higher percentage of rich people than in the state with the
lower percentage of rich people.
(b) In the setup of (a) (not necessarily with the numbers you made up there), let
D be the event that a randomly chosen person is a Democrat (with all 200 people
equally likely), and B be the event that the person lives in the Blue State. Suppose
that 10 people move from the Blue State to the Red State. Write Pold and Pnew for
probabilities before and after they move. Assume that people do not change parties,
so we have Pnew(D) = Pold(D). Is it possible that both Pnew(D|B) > Pold(D|B) and
Pnew(D|Bc) > Pold(D|Bc) are true? If so, explain how it is possible and why it does not
contradict the law of total probability P(D) = P(D|B)P(B) + P(D|Bc)P(Bc); if not,
show that it is impossible.
Mixed practice
60.
A patient is being given a blood test for the disease conditionitis. Let p be the prior
probability that the patient has conditionitis. The blood sample is sent to one of two
labs for analysis, lab A or lab B. The choice of which lab to use is made randomly,
independent of the patient's disease status, with probability 1/2 for each lab.
Conditional probability
97
For lab A, the probability of someone testing positive given that they do have the disease
is a1, and the probability of someone testing negative given that they do not have the
disease is a2. The corresponding probabilities for lab B are b1 and b2.
(a) Find the probability that the patient has the disease, given that they tested positive.
(b) Find the probability that the patient's blood sample was analyzed by lab A, given
that the patient tested positive.
61.
Fred decides to take a series of n tests, to diagnose whether he has a certain disease
(any individual test is not perfectly reliable, so he hopes to reduce his uncertainty by
taking multiple tests). Let D be the event that he has the disease, p = P(D) be the
prior probability that he has the disease, and q = 1 −p. Let Tj be the event that he
tests positive on the jth test.
(a) Assume for this part that the test results are conditionally independent given Fred's
disease status. Let a = P(Tj|D) and b = P(Tj|Dc), where a and b don't depend on j.
Find the posterior probability that Fred has the disease, given that he tests positive on
all n of the n tests.
(b) Suppose that Fred tests positive on all n tests. However, some people have a certain
gene that makes them always test positive. Let G be the event that Fred has the gene.
Assume that P(G) = 1/2 and that D and G are independent. If Fred does not have the
gene, then the test results are conditionally independent given his disease status. Let
a0 = P(Tj|D, Gc) and b0 = P(Tj|Dc, Gc), where a0 and b0 don't depend on j. Find the
posterior probability that Fred has the disease, given that he tests positive on all n of
the tests.
62.
A certain hereditary disease can be passed from a mother to her children. Given that
the mother has the disease, her children independently will have it with probability 1/2.
Given that she doesn't have the disease, her children won't have it either. A certain
mother, who has probability 1/3 of having the disease, has two children.
(a) Find the probability that neither child has the disease.
(b) Is whether the elder child has the disease independent of whether the younger child
has the disease? Explain.
(c) The elder child is found not to have the disease. A week later, the younger child is
also found not to have the disease. Given this information, find the probability that the
mother has the disease.
63.
Three fair coins are tossed at the same time. Explain what is wrong with the following
argument: "there is a 50% chance that the three coins all landed the same way, since
obviously it is possible to find two coins that match, and then the other coin has a 50%
chance of matching those two".
64.
An urn contains red, green, and blue balls. Let r, g, b be the proportions of red, green,
blue balls, respectively (r + g + b = 1).
(a) Balls are drawn randomly with replacement. Find the probability that the first time
a green ball is drawn is before the first time a blue ball is drawn.
Hint: Explain how this relates to finding the probability that a draw is green, given that
it is either green or blue.
(b) Balls are drawn randomly without replacement. Find the probability that the first
time a green ball is drawn is before the first time a blue ball is drawn. Is the answer the
same or different than the answer in (a)?
Hint: Imagine the balls all lined up, in the order in which they will be drawn. Note that
where the red balls are standing in this line is irrelevant.
98
Introduction to Probability
(c) Generalize the result from (a) to the following setting. Independent trials are per-
formed, and the outcome of each trial is classified as being exactly one of type 1, type 2,
. . . , or type n, with probabilities p1, p2, . . . , pn, respectively. Find the probability that
the first trial to result in type i comes before the first trial to result in type j, for i ̸= j.
65.
Marilyn vos Savant was asked the following question for her column in Parade:
You're at a party with 199 other guests when robbers break in and announce
that they are going to rob one of you. They put 199 blank pieces of paper in
a hat, plus one marked "you lose." Each guest must draw, and the person
who draws "you lose" will get robbed. The robbers offer you the option of
drawing first, last, or at any time in between. When would you take your
turn?
The draws are made without replacement, and for (a) are uniformly random.
(a) Determine whether it is optimal to draw first, last, or somewhere in between (or
whether it does not matter), to maximize the probability of not being robbed. Give a
clear, concise, and compelling explanation.
(b) More generally, suppose that there is one "you lose" piece of paper, with "weight"
v, and there are n blank pieces of paper, each with "weight" w. At each stage, draws
are made with probability proportional to weight, i.e., the probability of drawing a
particular piece of paper is its weight divided by the sum of the weights of all the
remaining pieces of paper. Determine whether it is better to draw first or second (or
whether it does not matter); here v > 0, w > 0, and n ≥1 are known constants.
66.
A fair die is rolled repeatedly, until the running total is at least 100 (at which point the
rolling stops). Find the most likely value of the final running total (i.e., the value of the
running total at the first time when it is at least 100).
Hint: Consider the possibilities for what the running total is just before the last roll.
67.
Homer has a box of donuts, which currently contains exactly c chocolate, g glazed, and
j jelly donuts. Homer eats donuts one after another, each time choosing uniformly at
random from the remaining donuts.
(a) Find the probability that the last donut remaining in the box is a chocolate donut.
(b) Find the probability of the following event: glazed is the first type of donut that
Homer runs out of, and then jelly is the second type of donut that he runs out of.
Hint: Consider the last donut remaining, and the last donut that is either glazed or jelly.
68.
Let D be the event that a person develops a certain disease, and C be the event that
the person was exposed to a certain substance (e.g., D may correspond to lung cancer
and C may correspond to smoking cigarettes). We are interested in whether exposure
to the substance is related to developing the disease (and if so, how they are related).
The odds ratio is a very widely used measure in epidemiology of the association between
disease and exposure, defined as
OR = odds(D|C)
odds(D|Cc),
where conditional odds are defined analogously to unconditional odds: odds(A|B) =
P (A|B)
P (Ac|B). The relative risk of the disease for someone exposed to the substance, another
widely used measure, is
RR = P(D|C)
P(D|Cc).
The relative risk is especially easy to interpret, e.g., RR = 2 says that someone exposed
to the substance is twice as likely to develop the disease as someone who isn't exposed
(though this does not necessarily mean that the substance causes the increased chance
of getting the disease, nor is there necessarily a causal interpretation for the odds ratio).
Conditional probability
99
(a) Show that if the disease is rare, both for exposed people and for unexposed people,
then the relative risk is approximately equal to the odds ratio.
(b) Let pij for i = 0, 1 and j = 0, 1 be the probabilities in the following 2 × 2 table.
D
Dc
C
p11
p10
Cc
p01
p00
For example, p10 = P(C, Dc). Show that the odds ratio can be expressed as a cross-
product ratio, in the sense that
OR = p11p00
p10p01 .
(c) Show that the odds ratio has the neat symmetry property that the roles of C and
D can be swapped without changing the value:
OR = odds(C|D)
odds(C|Dc).
This property is one of the main reasons why the odds ratio is so widely used, since it
turns out that it allows the odds ratio to be estimated in a wide variety of problems
where relative risk would be hard to estimate well.
69.
A researcher wants to estimate the percentage of people in some population who have
used illegal drugs, by conducting a survey. Concerned that a lot of people would lie
when asked a sensitive question like "Have you ever used illegal drugs?", the researcher
uses a method known as randomized response. A hat is filled with slips of paper, each
of which says either "I have used illegal drugs" or "I have not used illegal drugs". Let p
be the proportion of slips of paper that say "I have used illegal drugs" (p is chosen by
the researcher in advance).
Each participant chooses a random slip of paper from the hat and answers (truthfully)
"yes" or "no" to whether the statement on that slip is true. The slip is then returned
to the hat. The researcher does not know which type of slip the participant had. Let
y be the probability that a participant will say "yes", and d be the probability that a
participant has used illegal drugs.
(a) Find y, in terms of d and p.
(b) What would be the worst possible choice of p that the researcher could make in
designing the survey? Explain.
(c) Now consider the following alternative system. Suppose that proportion p of the slips
of paper say "I have used illegal drugs", but that now the remaining 1 −p say "I was
born in winter" rather than "I have not used illegal drugs". Assume that 1/4 of people
are born in winter, and that a person's season of birth is independent of whether they
have used illegal drugs. Find d, in terms of y and p.
70.
At the beginning of the play Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead by Tom Stop-
pard [25], Guildenstern is spinning coins and Rosencrantz is betting on the outcome for
each. The coins have been landing Heads over and over again, prompting the following
remark:
Guildenstern: A weaker man might be moved to re-examine his faith, if in
nothing else at least in the law of probability.
The coin spins have resulted in Heads 92 times in a row.
(a) Fred and his friend are watching the play. Upon seeing the events described above,
they have the following conversation:
100
Introduction to Probability
Fred: That outcome would be incredibly unlikely with fair coins. They must
be using trick coins (maybe with double-headed coins), or the experiment
must have been rigged somehow (maybe with magnets).
Fred's friend: It's true that the string HH. . . H of length 92 is very unlikely;
the chance is 1/292 ≈2 × 10−28 with fair coins. But any other specific
string of H's and T's with length 92 has exactly the same probability! The
reason the outcome seems extremely unlikely is that the number of possible
outcomes grows exponentially as the number of spins grows, so any outcome
would seem extremely unlikely. You could just as well have made the same
argument even without looking at the results of their experiment, which
means you really don't have evidence against the coins being fair.
Discuss these comments, to help Fred and his friend resolve their debate.
(b) Suppose there are only two possibilities: either the coins are all fair (and spun fairly),
or double-headed coins are being used (in which case the probability of Heads is 1). Let
p be the prior probability that the coins are fair. Find the posterior probability that the
coins are fair, given that they landed Heads in 92 out of 92 trials.
(c) Continuing from (b), for which values of p is the posterior probability that the coins
are fair greater than 0.5? For which values of p is it less than 0.05?
71.
There are n types of toys, which you are collecting one by one. Each time you buy a
toy, it is randomly determined which type it has, with equal probabilities. Let pij be the
probability that just after you have bought your ith toy, you have exactly j toy types
in your collection, for i ≥1 and 0 ≤j ≤n. (This problem is in the setting of the coupon
collector problem, a famous problem which we study in Example 4.3.12.)
(a) Find a recursive equation expressing pij in terms of pi−1,j and pi−1,j−1, for i ≥2
and 1 ≤j ≤n.
(b) Describe how the recursion from (a) can be used to calculate pij.
72.
A/B testing is a form of randomized experiment that is used by many companies to
learn about how customers will react to different treatments. For example, a company
may want to see how users will respond to a new feature on their website (compared
with how users respond to the current version of the website) or compare two different
advertisements.
As the name suggests, two different treatments, Treatment A and Treatment B, are
being studied. Users arrive one by one, and upon arrival are randomly assigned to one
of the two treatments. The trial for each user is classified as "success" (e.g., the user
made a purchase) or "failure". The probability that the nth user receives Treatment A
is allowed to depend on the outcomes for the previous users. This set-up is known as a
two-armed bandit.
Many algorithms for how to randomize the treatment assignments have been studied.
Here is an especially simple (but fickle) algorithm, called a stay-with-a-winner procedure:
(i) Randomly assign the first user to Treatment A or Treatment B, with equal proba-
bilities.
(ii) If the trial for the nth user is a success, stay with the same treatment for the
(n + 1)st user; otherwise, switch to the other treatment for the (n + 1)st user.
Let a be the probability of success for Treatment A, and b be the probability of success
for Treatment B. Assume that a ̸= b, but that a and b are unknown (which is why
the test is needed). Let pn be the probability of success on the nth trial and an be the
probability that Treatment A is assigned on the nth trial (using the above algorithm).
(a) Show that
pn = (a −b)an + b,
an+1 = (a + b −1)an + 1 −b.
Conditional probability
101
(b) Use the results from (a) to show that pn+1 satisfies the following recursive equation:
pn+1 = (a + b −1)pn + a + b −2ab.
(c) Use the result from (b) to find the long-run probability of success for this algorithm,
limn→∞pn, assuming that this limit exists.
73.
In humans (and many other organisms), genes come in pairs. A certain gene comes in
two types (alleles): type a and type A. The genotype of a person for that gene is the
types of the two genes in the pair: AA, Aa, or aa (aA is equivalent to Aa). Assume that
the Hardy-Weinberg law applies here, which means that the frequencies of AA, Aa, aa
in the population are p2, 2p(1 −p), (1 −p)2 respectively, for some p with 0 < p < 1.
When a woman and a man have a child, the child's gene pair has one gene contributed
by each parent. Suppose that the mother is equally likely to contribute either of the two
genes in her gene pair, and likewise for the father, independently. Also suppose that the
genotypes of the parents are independent of each other (with probabilities given by the
Hardy-Weinberg law).
(a) Find the probabilities of each possible genotype (AA, Aa, aa) for a child of two
random parents. Explain what this says about stability of the Hardy-Weinberg law
from one generation to the next.
Hint: Condition on the genotypes of the parents.
(b) A person of type AA or aa is called homozygous (for the gene under consideration),
and a person of type Aa is called heterozygous (for that gene). Find the probability
that a child is homozygous, given that both parents are homozygous. Also, find the
probability that a child is heterozygous, given that both parents are heterozygous.
(c) Suppose that having genotype aa results in a distinctive physical characteristic, so it
is easy to tell by looking at someone whether or not they have that genotype. A mother
and father, neither of whom are of type aa, have a child. The child is also not of type
aa. Given this information, find the probability that the child is heterozygous.
Hint: Use the definition of conditional probability. Then expand both the numerator
and the denominator using LOTP, conditioning on the genotypes of the parents.
74.
A standard deck of cards will be shuffled and then the cards will be turned over one at
a time until the first ace is revealed. Let B be the event that the next card in the deck
will also be an ace.
(a) Intuitively, how do you think P(B) compares in size with 1/13 (the overall proportion
of aces in a deck of cards)? Explain your intuition. (Give an intuitive discussion rather
than a mathematical calculation; the goal here is to describe your intuition explicitly.)
(b) Let Cj be the event that the first ace is at position j in the deck. Find P(B|Cj) in
terms of j, fully simplified.
(c) Using the law of total probability, find an expression for P(B) as a sum. (The sum
can be left unsimplified, but it should be something that could easily be computed in
software such as R that can calculate sums.)
(d) Find a fully simplified expression for P(B) using a symmetry argument.
Hint: If you were deciding whether to bet on the next card after the first ace being an
ace or to bet on the last card in the deck being an ace, would you have a preference?
